Being physically active is one of the most important things you can do for your health. This applies regardless of whether you are young or old, fat or thin, untrained or have long experience with exercise. The health effect comes immediately – and lasts the rest of your life.



Good health involves both physical and mental well-being. It's not just about avoiding illness or frailty, but also about feeling joy and having a good quality of life in everyday life. We at Mia Health help you to be physically active and achieve good health on your own terms.


What is physical activity?
Physical activity is all movement that increases your heart rate. Or to use the official definition: "all bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles that results in a significant increase in energy expenditure beyond resting level". When physical activity is planned and regular and carried out with a specific goal, it is called training. This goal can, for example, be to become healthier and slimmer. It can be to become more energized and have an easier everyday life. Or it can be to perform better in a given activity or distance. Physical activity and exercise can contribute to all of this. And it doesn't take much. In this article, we will take you through the health effects you can expect from being physically active – both immediately, in the slightly longer term, and for the rest of your life.





Woman walking dog in winter landscape
Physical activity is a miracle medicine that has effects on both physical, mental, and social health. (Photo: Mia Health)

Immediate effects
You get a health effect from physical activity immediately after the first workout. A single session makes your mood rise, your head becomes sharper, and your body becomes better at dealing with unhealthy sugar and fat floating around in your blood.


Sharpens the mind and removes fatigue
You may have heard that exercise "gives energy". It is well documented that you feel more energetic after a workout. And such a feeling of having more energy contributes to less exhaustion and fatigue. In fact, the brain works better right after a workout. Among other things, reaction time decreases, one becomes able to make decisions faster, and performance increases. So after a strenuous day, it's not a long evening on the couch that brings back energy and creativity. A short, effective workout, on the other hand! 





Causes fewer worries
During and immediately after physical activity, the secretion of happiness and reward hormones such as dopamine, serotonin, and endorphins increases. This may explain why self-esteem increases after being physically active. One becomes happy and feels good. One simply gets a more positive attitude to life!  Right after exercise, one is also less prone to anxiety in stressful situations. In other words: A little physical activity right beforehand can actually make a job interview, an important sales meeting, or a crucial exam a less stressful experience.





winter joy
Physical activity has a health effect immediately! During and right after you have been active, your body overflows with signaling substances that make you more refreshed, energetic, happy, and mentally present.

Lowers appetite and improves sleep
If you struggle to sleep at night, a little half-hour of physical activity can help. People with sleep problems fall asleep more easily, sleep longer, and have better sleep quality if they have been physically active before bedtime. If you smoke, you can consider that physical activity counteracts nicotine cravings both during and for a good while after the activity. And if the goal is to lose a few pounds, it may be useful to know that you actually feel less hungry after exercising. A single workout affects the secretion of hormones that regulate appetite. Thus, one usually does not eat more in the hours after exercise than one would otherwise have done, even if one has burned more calories.





Risk factors decrease
Already after one session of physical activity, your body is healthier. Insulin sensitivity increases immediately, so that sugar is absorbed into the cells instead of floating around in the blood. For people with diabetes, this acute effect lasts for up to three days. A combination of high blood sugar, unfavorable fats in the blood, and a high degree of inflammation can damage blood vessel walls. Fortunately, the levels of harmful fats also drop acutely after exercise. In addition, much suggests that exercise has an immediate anti-inflammatory effect. And not only that: In the hours after a workout, blood pressure drops, and blood vessels become more elastic.





Great effect after a few weeks
It's amazing to think that after just one session of physical activity, your body begins to take steps that lead to better health!  But these effects only last for a few hours, or at best a couple of days. The key to achieving long-term adaptations is therefore to repeat the training regularly. However, it does not take many weeks of physical activity before the chronic health effects begin to appear.




Active events
Good planning and regular appointments provide a good basis for regular physical activity. You will notice the lasting effect on physical and mental health after a few weeks.


Better mental health and quality of life
One of these effects is better mental health. Good mental health means feeling good about oneself and experiencing joy and well-being in life. If one has good mental health, one has, for example, few symptoms of anxiety and depression, and one feels less stressed at work and in everyday life. A good exercise program can undoubtedly provide great gains for mental health. Among other things, several studies show that regular exercise leads to less panic disorder and less social anxiety. In addition, exercise over time can lead to fewer symptoms of depression  and cause stress levels to drop. Regular physical activity makes you less prone to constant mood swings. Specifically, this means that you become less angry, confused, exhausted, and tense than you were before you started exercising. When all this is taken into account, it is perhaps not so surprising that physically active people generally have a better quality of life than those who are inactive.





Fitter brain
There are probably many reasons why exercise improves mental health. Some of them are linked to lasting changes that occur in the brain when one exercises regularly. Among other things, exercise leads to the formation of new brain cells  and new blood vessels in the brain. The result is improved memory. In addition, we become more attentive and better able to learn new things. And as we will return to: The risk of developing dementia decreases significantly for people who are regularly physically active.





MIA-FATHER-DAUGHTER-SKATING-HEART RATE MONITOR4-small
Physical activity increases quality of life, strengthens the brain, and provides energy to spend quality time with people you care about. (Photo: Mia Health)

Lower disease risk
A few months of structured exercise is sufficient to lower most common risk factors for lifestyle diseases. Blood pressure drops, and cholesterol levels in the blood become healthier. Exercise is also effective in lowering blood sugar, especially for those who need it most. Regular exercise also leads to healthier blood vessels. The diameter of the large vessels that carry blood from the heart increases, so that blood flows more easily through the vessels. In addition, the blood vessels' ability to expand increases. Exercise stimulates the growth of new small blood vessels around our muscles, which makes the muscles better able to absorb oxygen and nutrients transported with the blood.





Stronger muscles and skeleton
Overweight individuals can lose a few kilograms after just a few months of exercise. But for health's sake, it is probably even more important to know that exercise can remove fat from the body and replace it with muscle mass, both for overweight individuals and people with normal body weight. Exercise not only gives the body larger muscles, but the muscles also become stronger. Although strength training is naturally most effective for getting stronger, endurance training can also lead to increased muscle strength. And being physically strong is closely linked to good mental health and reduced disease risk. And for the record: It's never too late to start exercising. Even after reaching 75 years of age, strength training leads to a significant increase in muscle mass and muscle strength. Like muscles, the skeleton becomes stronger with exercise. In both younger and older individuals, bone density increases in both the spine and thigh bones after a period of exercise.





Better fitness and stronger heart
There is a very close connection between good fitness and good health and quality of life. Regular endurance training is the most effective method to increase fitness, but for untrained individuals, strength training also has some effect. One of the most important reasons why good fitness leads to good health is that good fitness requires a strong heart. Endurance training makes the heart start pumping blood more efficiently to the rest of the body. The heart grows strong, pumps more blood with each beat, and fills better with blood between beats. Exercise can even reverse some of the weaknesses and damage we see in sick hearts, for example after a heart attack. In addition, exercise leads to a decrease in resting heart rate and a healthier natural variation in heart rhythm from beat to beat.





Makes everyday tasks easier
With a stronger heart, stronger muscles, and lighter body, the tasks you perform every day become easier. You use a lower percentage of your maximum capacity when carrying groceries home from the store, jumping on the trampoline with your 4-year-old, moving heavy furniture into your new apartment, and when running to catch the bus. For the elderly, the risk of falls and bone fractures decreases. It goes without saying that all of this is important for quality of life.




quality of life
With all the physical and mental health effects physical activity provides, it's no wonder that quality of life also increases.

Lowers the risk of many diseases
After a few months of regular physical activity, you may have reached your first activity goal. But exercise is perishable, and it doesn't take many weeks of inactivity before you have fallen back to square one. To achieve lasting change in health and quality of life, you must repeat the activity over many years. If you make physical activity a lifelong lifestyle, you lay the foundation for a healthy old age and a long life.




Prevents cardiovascular disease and cancer
The list of diseases one can reduce the risk of by being physically active is long. Physical inactivity is linked to an increased risk of at least 35 different chronic conditions. This includes most cardiovascular diseases, such as heart attack, high blood pressure, heart failure, stroke, and peripheral artery disease. Obesity  and diabetes  can also be prevented by being physically active. The same applies to metabolic syndrome, which means having both obesity and several other risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Furthermore, at least ten types of cancer can be prevented by being physically active. These include colorectal cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, uterine cancer, liver cancer, bladder cancer, and rectal cancer.





Prevents mental disorders, dementia, and chronic pain
Physically active people are less likely to suffer from depression, anxiety, and cognitive impairments such as Alzheimer's disease  and other types of dementia. It is also worth mentioning that men and women who have been regularly physically active throughout their lives suffer less from bodily pain. Activity prevents muscle wasting as one gets older, and exercise also counteracts the development of osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis.



Activity is medicine for the chronically ill
If you already have a chronic illness, there is no reason to skip exercise. Physical activity is effective medicine for at least 26 medical conditions. Essentially, these are the same diseases that can be prevented by exercising. Exercise is, for example, effective in alleviating symptoms and improving the health of people with depression and anxiety, dementia, metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular diseases, COPD and other lung diseases, cancer, and various musculoskeletal disorders such as osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis. As many have said before us: If physical activity had been a pill, everyone would have taken it! 





elderly
People who have been physically active throughout their lives have a lower risk of getting all the major common diseases as they get older. Not only do you live longer if you are physically active, you also live better.


Adds life to years
Knowing all this, it probably comes as no surprise that people who are physically active throughout their lives live on average many years longer than people who are physically inactive. Now, perhaps not everyone has the goal of becoming terribly old, but we must remember what this entails: Exercise delays aging and reduces the risk of all the major common diseases. This means that not only do you live longer if you are physically active, you also live the last years of your life with better health and higher quality of life. Becoming 100 years old with good health perhaps sounds better than becoming 80 and living with failing health for the last decade of your life?  Mia Health aims to be your meeting place and helping hand for physical activity and good health for the rest of your life. Together with us, physical activity will not only be a lifestyle, but also a fun lifestyle!  If you start today, you will feel the effect already... yes, today!